This is the Falkirk Wheel and it is one of the biggest examples of modern industrial design
in the world.
At the top of the hill is the Union Canal and below is the Forth and Clyde Canal.
And the traditional way to get boats from one channel to another was through a route of locks, which is about
it took a day to get through and in addition they were dismantled here in the thirties. The solution:
the world's only rotating boat lift.
Now, ship lifts are not a new one. They have existed for centuries. Most of them, like
these, have two caissons, the technical term for the bins in which the boats are, though
they usually lie next to each other instead of rotating around a central point. And the
reason for two is: to lift 500 tons 24 meters, you have at least
32 kilowatt hours needed. That's about what an average British home uses in three
days, or an average American house in one day. And that is even before taking friction into account, that is only
the potential energy needed to raise the system so far. But if
you at the same time also let the same weight of water drop at the same rate,
then you do not add any potential energy at all. On average nothing goes up or
down. You only move a very heavy thing and stop it again. Therefore
this wheel only needs one and a half kilowatt hours for lifting up: less than a twentieth
of what it would otherwise need.
There are even some ship lifts in the world that are fully powered by gravity, where the local conditions
and architecture allows it: you just fill the upper one with a little more water, let it drain
and then brake when necessary. A bit tricky with something like that
if this. The construction has to be strengthened, there is an incredible amount of moment
look at it.
And the really smart part: remember the principle of Archimedes, the Greek guy with
the bathtub. A floating object moves the same amount of water equal to its weight. An object
that sinks naturally displaces just as much as its volume, but a floating object, like a boat,
displaces as much water as its weight. When they are full of water, those caissons weigh
about 500 tons. If you add one to ten tons of floating boat, ten tons of water will flow
into the channel.
Which means that this is balanced, no matter how much actually floats in the water.